Okay. Since we're a little bit behind schedule
already, I'm gonna go ahead and jump into
the next lecture. So as an introduction, I'm
Sanvit. Oh, and this is Evan. He doesn't
have a mic, so I'm saying his name
for him. Yeah. So our lecture's going to
be on HTML and CSS. You might have
already seen this before, but again, we're going
to start off a little bit slow and
then speed up gradually. And if this is
new to you, don't worry, because again, we'll
have the lectures on our website for you
to review. Before we jump in, let's talk
a little bit about why HTML and CSS
is important to learn. So arguably, the thing
in website design is conveying information to a
user in a way that's, like, nice to
see. And HTML and CSS are going to
be our core two things for front end
development for that purpose. So here's a website
that you might be familiar with, and here
is the HTML and CSS kind of extracted
from it. So HTML stands for Hypertext Markup
Language. You can basically just think of it
as the language that your Web browser is
reading through in order to describe what web
page you're looking at. A common analogy people
will use is that HTML is like or
if, like, a Web page was, like, a
fully formed person, then HTML is the skeleton
that's holding the structure together, and CSS is
like the bells and whistles, like the nice
flesh that makes it appealing to look at.
Fortunately, the main idea of this lecture is
going be that HTML is really simple, and
you can actually just think of it as
a bunch of nested boxes or containers. So
let's see what that actually means using this
example from xkcd. All HTML is really describing
on this Web page are these containers. So
here's a big one. Here's the container that
contains the entire Web page. Here is one
that contains a little bit more closely all
the information on the Web page. Here are
three containers contained within that that have the
NavBar, the title, and the actual content, and
so on and so on. So let's look
into the code to see how this is
actually done. Here's a really, really simple website.
The code on the left generates this kind
of bare bones looking website on the right.
So let's walk through the code and see
how every part of it affects the site
that we see. So first, in any HTML
document, you want to include this header thing
called doctype. Html. It basically just tells your
web browser to use the latest version of
HTML. It's pretty easy to forget, but it's
kind of important, so try to remember. Next,
we move on to our first HTML element,
and you'll see that it has this kind
of opening and closing structure. And of course,
that's because the elements are containers, like I
mentioned before. So the key structure of HTML
elements elements is that they have an opening
tag, which is just the name of it
with these bracket things, and then a closing
tag, which is the same thing, but with
a forward slash. And anything that's contained within
it will go in between. Pretty intuitive. And
you can see that container structure right here,
where we have the HTML container. It's containing
both the head and the body, and then
both of those contain other things as well.
I think the syntax for HTML is pretty
simple, as long as you keep in mind
that it has to respect the fact that
it's a container, right? So you can't have
this kind of thing where you're starting something,
starting another thing, and then closing the first
thing before you close the other one. So
this is basically the only thing to remember.
Just make sure that it's nested properly, and
you should be fine. All right, I'll pause
here for questions, if there are any. Okay,
cool. So let's go back to the code
and look at things a little bit more
deeply. So I mentioned the structure of this
thing, but I didn't actually tell you what
it does. This one is called the root,
and it's just going to contain all things
in the web page. And the syntax is
pretty simple, it's just HTML. Within those, you're
always going to include the head and the
body. Within the head, you store what's called
metadata. So metadata is things that aren't going
to be displayed on the website, but they'll
help it, like, do what it needs to
do. So for example, we'll include the title
here, and you'll see that it's not actually
on the document. It's not in, like, heading
or paragraph, but it's in the top here
in this tab thing. Other things you'll include
in there are links to other files, like
style sheets, which Evan will talk about later
in the lecture. Next is the body, and
this is going to contain everything that's actually
displayed. So that means the heading and the
paragraph, which have the following names for their
tags. So as a quick stopping point, the
HTML tags that we've covered so far are
HTML, head, body, the headers, and the paragraphs.
I also included these other ones, div and
span. They're pretty important, and I'll talk about
it in a little bit, but they're kind
of like your generic if you don't know
what else to do, you use those tags.
There's also this notion of attributes for HTML
elements. So we see this plain structure here
that I showed you before. But what if
you wanted to modify your element in a
way that you couldn't just do by adding
text or adding, like, something inside of it.
What you do is, within the opening tag,
you add an attribute. So an attribute will
be defined by putting the name of the
attribute and then setting it equal to something
within a string. Attributes, and that's the value.
So some common places that you might be
using attributes. One very common one is inserting
links. So the syntax for link is just
a, stands for anchor, if you're curious. Insert
a link, you'll add the attribute for href,
and the value is just going to be
the link. Here's an example of that. If
you click on this link, it'll go to
weblab.mit.edu. Another really common one is going to
be images. So for image, to insert an
image, you'll go to the source attribute, src,
and then you set that equal to the
name of the image, wherever that is, like
relative to your directory. Now, there's something a
little bit weird here with this opening and
closing thing for images, because when you have
an image, you're not really going to put
anything inside of it. You're not going to
put text of your image, or you might,
but probably not in this way. So instead,
what HTML lets you do is get rid
of the closing tag entirely and make what's
called a self closing tag. So for this,
it'll display the same thing that it did
before, just an image. But because you don't
need anything inside of the opening and closing,
you just make it one tag. Oh, another
thing to keep in mind, as I mentioned
before, you have to navigate to the correct,
like, file name. So if your HTML file
was in, like, the same directory, like, directly
as your image or GIF or whatever, you
can just put it like this. But if
it's in within another folder, then you need
to update that accordingly. Another quick thing is,
in the case that your browser doesn't display
an image correctly, it's good practice to just
add alt text so that maybe a user
who's confused why they don't see a picture
will understand. This is also good for semantics.
If you're just reading through your code and
not looking at the web page, it may
be good to label things with alt text
and things like that. I'll stop here for
questions once again. Alright. Some other common elements
are lists. List is pretty simple. You can
have ordered or unordered lists, and they contain
list elements. I think that one's pretty self
explanatory. Okay. Back to the ones that I
mentioned before, div and span. So div and
span are going to be your, like, go
to generic elements. And all they really do
or they don't do anything, like, specific. All
they do is just group together other elements.
So they're just like plain containers. The difference
between them is that div will group, like,
a block section, while span will group something
that's, like, in line. So if you wanted
to select, like let's say you have, like,
a paragraph and you wanted to select, like,
one thing to maybe, like, style it, then
you could use span around that, like, word
or, like, a couple words, and then it
would stay in line. Whereas if you use
div, then it would, like, try to, like,
do a line break or something like that.
So here's an example of two divs and
two spans. So as you can see, like,
the divs are stacked on top of each
other, whereas the spans are they respect, like,
they're not stacked anymore. So if we wanted
to add a div to our old website,
we could just, I don't know, box our
body around with the div. You might be
wondering, oh, why did I do that? It
doesn't really do anything. But now we have
this nice box where we can just refer
to like the div and then it'll refer
to both the heading and the paragraph. And
this becomes helpful when you're doing styling and
stuff. Evan will talk about that more. Yeah.
So I threw a whole lot of tags
at you and maybe not like that much
time to remember all of them. But don't
worry, because Google is gonna be your best
friend with this. It's not that hard to
find HTML elements and like what they're best
used for. You can go to this site
called MDN Web Docs and it has pretty
good descriptions of all the elements. All right.
I'll stop here for questions again. Okay, cool.
So as I mentioned before, div is like
a very generic element and you're probably going
to want to use it a lot when
you're doing styling and referring to groups of
things like that. And at some point, I'm
sure you'll wonder, like, why not just use
div for everything? And there's a couple reasons.
If we look at the MDN Web Docs,
actually, they say that div should only be
used when there's no other semantic element that's
appropriate. And a semantic element is just one
that's, like, labeled with what exactly it's supposed
to do. So, for example, like nav bar,
that's a semantic element. It's just nav. Header,
footer, section, these are all just better things
to use. One is for readability, because maybe
you come back to your project a week
later and you forgot what all these divs
are supposed to do. But then, if you
have semantic elements, then it's easier to, like,
parse your code. It's also helpful for, like,
Web crawlers and bots that are just looking
through your website. Yeah. So to sum up,
don't just use div. It's useful, it's helpful,
it's like the first thing you'll go to,
but try to use MDN Web Docs to
find the element that best fits your needs.
Alright. This has been our intro to HTML.
And I'll pass it on to Evan to
talk about CSS. So CSS stands for cascading
style sheets. And it's used used for styling
your browser. And cascading stands for sort of
how the rules are applied, because they're applied
in sort of other rules override others depending
on the order they're written. So back to
the Cafe Bon Appetit website, this is what
it looks like with CSS and HTML. But
if you take away the CSS, then you
end up with something like this. And you
can test this out for yourself in your
browser if you just go to the website
and then open Developer Tools. And you can
go into the head of the HTML and
delete all the style sheets which are linked.
So back to our analogy, CSS sort of
adds a look to your skeleton that HTML
gives you. Here's what a basic CSS rule
set looks like. At the top, you have
your selector. This lets you indicate which HTML
element you're trying to style. This might be
something like div or h1, so an actual
HTML element, but it could also be something
like a class or an ID, which we'll
talk about in a sec. After that, you
also have the property, which is, in this
case, color. And this selects what property you're
going to adjust with your style, and then
you add the actual value that you're going
to adjust. So let's see what this looks
like. If we have our heading and paragraph
here, we'll add one more line, which we'll
use later. Then if we add the div
styling sheet, which has the color set to
red and the font set to Arial, we
see that it changes from serif font to
the red aerial. And I have to join
the Zoom real quick. Alright. Yeah. So if
you add in the style sheet of div,
then you change the font and color to
red Arial. Now one more thing we can
do is instead of doing the selector for
div, is we can do a selector for
class. So in this case, if we create
a class, the syntax for that is you
just do a dot, and then you follow
it with the class name. Then instead of
selecting all divs within the HTML document, you
can select only those which you indicate with
the class info. And so in this case,
you see that only info is red and
Arial, whereas paragraph is still serif and black.
Another one you can use is something called
an ID. And so ID is different. You
put in the attribute ID. And on the
CSS side, you put in a hashtag to
indicate that it's an ID. So in this
case, it sort of looks like they do
the exact same thing, but we can talk
a little bit about how they're different. So
the first thing is if you have a
given HTML element, you can only have one
ID. So within the ID attribute, you can
only put in a single ID. Whereas for
classes, you can list out a bunch of
classes spaced out. And if you put in
multiple classes, like class one, class two, class
three, this can imply the style from class
one, two, and three. Whereas with an ID,
you only get the style from the single
ID. Furthermore, IDs must be only given to
a single element on the HTML document. So
you can't have one div with a given
ID and then another div that has the
same ID to apply the same styling. If
you want to do that, you have to
use a class, and you can place the
class on multiple different elements. And the syntax
is, of course, different, the hashtag versus the
dot. One more thing to talk about in
terms of these IDs and classes is the
hierarchy. So this is the cascading part of
the CSS. And so the lowest specificity is
when we have elements and we select for
example, we selected a div and added styling
to it. And the highest specificity is when
you do inline styling. And so that's with
something called the style attribute, but we don't
usually use it because it's bad practice. So
on this hierarchy, we see that IDs are
higher than classes. And what this means is
if you have some CSS code like this
where you have a class like info and
you set the color to red, and then
let's say you have the lower specificity div,
which sets the color to blue, Then the
div with the class info okay, wait, ignore
the paragraph. That should actually be blue. But
the div with info, which has class info,
takes on the color red because the class
takes higher precedence over the HTML element. And
we see that the Arial font family is
still applied, not on the paragraph, on the
info still. That's wrong, my bad. Yeah, so
that's the hierarchy. We go from elements, then
you apply your class styling. And then if
you have an ID, the ID styling overrides
any of that. So best practice is to
mainly use classes because they're the most flexible.
You can reuse them so that you don't
have to rewrite your CSS over and over
again. And it's your highest specificity over your
general element selectors. Are there any questions on
CSS? If not, we can briefly look at
how you actually put this into your website.
So if we go back to our hello
HTML, we have this head section, which is
where we want to put our metadata. And
so that's where we link our stylesheet. So
we link our stylesheet. Css that we just
wrote, and then that'll put in the style.
So then if you want to apply any
classes that we wrote within the stylesheet, such
as my class, then you can just put
it in as an HTML attribute, and then
you should get everything that you want. And
you can link multiple style sheets as well.
If you have a style sheet where you
specifically focus on styling fonts and then another
for specifically styling how you want things ordered
with respect to each other. You could have
different style sheets to organize that and then
apply them all at once within the HTML
document. So I guess in conclusion, HTML is
your nested boxes and CSS is your list
of descriptions. And you put it all together
to get your website. Are there any questions?
If not, then you can put more feedback
for this. Yeah. You can put your feedback
here.